5 Trends in Indian Consumer Behavior
Raj Shamani
Raj Shamani

·
Follow

3 min read
·
Jan 8, 2024
63





Image by snowing on Freepik
India is truly a business hub now. More and more multinational companies and giants from across the borders are wanting to set up retail stores and factories here in India. The sole reason being the Indian customers. Over the years, the image of India has changed and so have the citizens and their likings. This has obviously affected not just the domestic market but the international market as well. Today, we will study the patterns in Indian consumer behavior.

1. Affluence
Indians have always been known for prioritizing quantity over quality. We were infamous for not wanting to spend too much on the non-essential items. However, this is changing. The Gen Z and the millennials alike now prefer to buy branded products. They prefer the quality and would not mind spending a few more bucks for the same. You can say that from the increase in the number of iPhone users and the number of luxury cars we see on the streets of India. And the best part is — this is not just visible in metro cities but is slowly penetrating Tier II and Tier III cities.

2. Online shopping
Online shopping is the new ‘it’ thing. People no longer have that time and energy to go to shops and buy things physically. They would want to browse through shopping apps and get their hands on desired products. Obviously the advent of UPI (Unified Payment Interface) has made the process a whole lot easier. From groceries to designer bags, we can get our hands on anything and everything through online shopping. Small business owners have benefited from this the most. If you are making something innovative from the comfort of your home, all you need to do is promote it and you will soon start getting customers.

3. Sustainable and informed shopping
Most Indians, at least those who have that privilege, would avoid any product or company that does not prioritize sustainable shopping. They would spend their hard earned money but do enough research on the brand and its products. Most people look for product reviews online while some also look up the manufacturing details and other stuff. Indian consumers therefore are now more conscious and would not spend their money on anything and everything.

4. Customized products
The consumers are more discerned than ever. They want a product tailored to their preferences. Large brands often struggle to provide this level of customization. Consequently, people are turning to smaller brands known for crafting quality products. From personalized skincare routines to customized travel packages, brands are adapting to meet this growing demand for individualized experiences. This is also an opportunity for brands to get in touch with their consumers.

5. Experience over materialistic possession
This is the dominance era for the new generation, who do not believe that it is necessary to own a car and a house of their own. They have no problem renting and actually prefer that. These kinds of consumers prefer a good experience over an expensive or a fine-dining dinner date. The younger demographic wants to make good memories and enjoy life’s experiences. To keep up with these kinds of expectations, brands are also adapting to provide richer, more fulfilling experiences.


The landscape of Indian consumer behavior is evolving rapidly, driven by digital advancements, environmental consciousness and individualization. Brands that have cracked this code are thriving successfully and tapping into the previously unexplored Indian market.